---
layout: post
title: What’s a lattice anyway?
--- 

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>



In common language, a lattice is something like a regular grid. This picture agrees with *some* mathematical terminology, where e.g. the product $$\mathbb{Z}\times \mathbb{Z}$$ is (reasonably enough) called a lattice. This is not the kind of lattice we’ll talk about.

Let $$P$$ be a poset. An element $$v\in P$$ is called the **join** of the pair $$a,b\in P$$ if it is the *least upper bound* of $$a$$ and $$b$$. In this case, we write $$v=a\vee b$$. Similarly, we could consider the join of any subset $$S\subseteq P$$.

For example, the powerset of a given set $$X$$ is naturally a poset under inclusion of subsets. The join of two subsets $$A,B\subseteq X$$ is then simply their union $$A\cup B$$. Another example is to consider the natural numbers ordered by divisibility, i.e. we say $$a\leq b$$ whenever $$a\vert b$$ in $$\mathbb{N}$$. The join $$a\vee b$$ is then the least common multiple $$lcm(a,b)$$.

From a categorical perspective, the join is precisely the coproduct (when viewing the poset as a category). In general, a coproduct is 'only' unique up to unique isomorphism, but note that in our case this is precisely equality. Dually, the product is then called the **meet**, i.e. the greatest lower bound. In the above examples, it would correspond to the intersection and greatest common divisor, respectively. It is denoted $$a\wedge b$$.

The way I remember the terminology is that the meet corresponds to the intersection of sets, i.e. where the sets « meet », while the union contains both, so it « joins » them. This makes sense, I assure you.

Equipped with these concepts, we can now give the following

**Definition.** A **lattice** is a poset admitting all finite meets and joins.

Removing the finiteness condition in favor of arbitrary meets and joins, we get the notion of a **complete lattice**. Both examples above are complete lattices, but not every lattice is complete: under the same notions of meet and join as in the powerset example, the lattice of open subsets of a topological space is not complete, since the arbitrary intersection of opens need not be open.
